# Greenwich Time Signal

The [Greenwich Time Signal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greenwich_Time_Signal), popularly known as **the pips**,
is a series of six short tones broadcast at one-second intervals by many BBC Radio stations.
The pips were introduced in 1924 and have been generated by the BBC since 1990 to mark the precise start of each hour.
Their utility in calibration is diminishing as digital broadcasting entails time lags.

## Structure

There are six pips (short beeps) in total, which occur on each of the 5 seconds leading up to the hour and on the hour itself.
Each pip is a 1 kHz tone the first 5 of which last 0.1s, while the final pip lasts 0.5s.
The actual moment when the hour changes – the "on-time marker" – is at the very beginning of the last pip.

In this project we use the pips for the last 6 seconds of the generated ident, the first pip occuring at T-6s and the
last *long* pip at T-1s. The end of the audio then aligns to the end of the ident & the start of the clip.

## Generation

The two pips were generated in [Audacity](https://www.audacityteam.org/) using its tone generator.
* Waveform: `sine`
* Frequency (Hz): `1000`
* Amplitude: `0.8`
* Duration:
    * `pip_0.1.wav` 0.1s tone for the short pip,
    * `pip_0.5.wav` 0.5s tone for the long pip.

Audacity's silence generator was also used to generate the silent portions of the sample using the silence generator.
There are 6 portions of silence generated but only 2 are used to generate the time signal.
* `silence_0.5.wav` 0.5s of silence
* `silence_0.9.wav` 0.9s of silence
* `silence_1.0.wav` 1.0s of silence *- not used but intended if needing to pad the wave file if the pips don't start at
  the start of the output.*
* `silence_6.0.wav` 6.0s of silence *- not used by intended to be used if an additional track is required to match the
  final output.*

The `greenwich-pips.sh` script runs ffmpeg to merge the pips into the final `greenwich-pips.wav`.

It's customisable so if you wanted more or less short pips you can change the `seq 1 5` portion of the script for the number
of short pips required - so for a 10 pip sound, change it to `seq 1 9` then you will have 9 short & 1 long pip in the output.
